okay so welcome back the next few
segments of this class are going to be
parsing as you will notice later on
parsing is one of the most important
technologies used in natural language
processing many further components such
as text summarization question answering
and machine translation rely on
successful parsing for them to succeed
so let's consider the problem of parsing
I'm going to start with an example from
parsing a programming language so we
have here a C program to reverse a
number you all familiar with the syntax
of programming languages they include
variables blocks statements and so on
what is however very important about
computer languages is that their syntax
is unambiguous this is not the case
however for human languages human
languages are very different in many
different ways can you think in what
ways they're different as far as parsing
is concerned so there are no types for
words
so unlike computer languages where we
know that the certain string is a
variable or a comment in a natural
language we don't know or whether a
certain word is a noun or verb
automatically there no brackets around
the phrases unlike programming languages
where we have four statements and if
statements that have a explicit
bracketing around the statements that
compose them there's also a lot of
ambiguity as we've talked about before
so the wimba Gaetti can be at the level
of the individual words or at the level
of parses and there's also a lot of
implied information which makes human
language parse to give it more
complicated for example in a given
dialogue one of the participants in the
conversation may be referring to an
object that was visually available but
not part of the text it's also possible
to refer to knowledge from the outside
world that is not obvious from the
sentences in the text so what is parsing
so the parsing problem is essentially to
associate some sort of a structure of
the tree structure with a sentence and
this is done usually using a grammar
very often a context-free grammar
there may be exactly one such tree
structure give it a sentence and a
grammar there may be many such sentences
in which case you want to pick the one
that is most likely or most appropriate
or it can also be the case that there
may be none in which case that
particular sentence would not be parsed
successfully by that grammar one thing
to keep in mind is that grammars are
declarative this applies to all grammar
is including context-free grammars so
what that means is that you can use a
grammar to describe a sentence but you
cannot automatically come up with the
methods to convert the sentence into a
parse tree you have to augment the
grammar is using some code so in other
words the grammars are not sufficient to
specify how the parse tree is going to
be constructed we've talked about
syntactic ambiguities before let me just
remind you of those a little bit so we
have problems with prepositional phrase
attachment so in the sentence I saw the
man with the telescope we can have one
interpretation where I used the
telescope to see the man and another
interpretation where I saw a man who
himself was carrying a telescope so this
is a PP attachment problem because the
prepositional phrase with the telescope
can attach to either the verb of the
sentence so or to man which is the
direct object we could have gaps so for
example the senders Mary likes physics
but hates chemistry it is clear that the
subject of the second verb hates is also
Mary however this is not explicit from
the structure so a successful parser
should be able to infer that Mary is the
subject of both verbs not just the first
one
coordination scope is another
interesting ambiguity if we have a
sentence like small boys and girls are
playing we may have two possible
interpretations the first one is that
the boys are small and the girls are of
any age whereas second interpretation is
that both the boys and the girls are
small so this is an example of a
coordination ambiguity and it's called
that way because and is a coordinating
conjunction there are many cases where a
certain award can be considered as
either a particle or preposition for
example if you say she ran up a large
bill the word up
is used as a particle in the phrasal
verb run up so she ran up a large boo is
interpreted as she incurred a large bill
whereas if we change this to she ran up
a large hill in that case up a large
hill is a prepositional phrase and the
word up is not attached directly to the
verb ran but rather it is the head of
the phrase up a large bill another
example is the do use of some words as
both gerunds and adjectives so Gerald is
a verb form or is an adjective is a
something completely different a
different part of speech so a typical
example would be something like this
frightening kids can cause trouble so
there are two interpretations here in
one of them frightening is an adjective
and just modifies kids and the second
example it's a gerund in which case we
have frightening kids as in two
frightened kids the action of doing that
can cause trouble so let's see what kind
of applications of parsing there are so
the first one is in grammar checking so
every time you go to your favorite
editor you will be able to see some
feedback so if you type a sentence that
doesn't look very medical you will see
it underlined and you will have a chance
to correct it for example if I want to
say if I say I want to return this shoes
the grammar checker will parse the
sentence and recognize that this it's
income ungrammatical and it will suggest
to change it to either I want to return
these shoes or perhaps this shoe but not
these shoes another examples question
answering so if you have a question of
this nature how many people in sales
make $40,000 or more per year
you need a parser to be able to
recognize that you're looking for a
record in a database where the record is
about a person and that forty K is an
attribute and so on
now there is up with machine translation
as we know from before different
languages have different word order so
for example a language that is
subject-object-verb when it needs to be
translated to a language at the
subject-verb-object
would have to undergo some syntactic
transformation so we have to do this
parsing the next task is information
extraction in information extraction we
want to recognize different phrases and
how they relate to each other and also
what are their types so in the sentence
Breaking Bad takes place in New Mexico
we want to recognize that Breaking Bad
is a name of a TV show and that New
Mexico is a name of a state and there
many other applications for example for
speech generation for speech
understanding for interpretation of
sentences and so on so the next topic is
about context-free grammars we've
mentioned them briefly in the past we
are going to go into a lot more detail
this time around so what is a
context-free grammar context-free
grammar is a four tuple a consisting of
the following four symbols and Sigma R
and s what are those well and it's a set
of non-terminal symbols for example R
symbols for sentences prepositional
phrases verb phrases and so on Sigma is
a set of terminal symbols those are
words for example Mary or John or like
and so on and it is assumed that the set
of terminal symbols is distinct so this
joint from the set of non terminal
symbols
there's also set of rules where on the
left hand side you have a non terminal
symbol a which is a part of the set of
non terminal symbols on the right hand
side you have better we're better is a
string that can combine any symbols from
Sigma and n you can have any number of
those from zero to a large number and
finally S is a specific designated start
symbol in n when we parse entire
sentences s happens to be the central
symbol but in general there's no reason
why a context-free grammar cannot be
used to parse some other syntactic
constituents for example noun phrases or
even entire paragraphs okay let's look
at an example on the top line of the
slide we have a sentence that we want to
parse the sentence is the child ate the
cake with a fork and the grammar that we
have here is a context-free grammar with
8 non-terminal symbols as for sentence
and P P P and VP for noun phrase
prepositional phrase and verb phrase
respectively
Tifa determiner or article in this
example and for now for position and
finally we have some past tense verbs
you will see that some of the rules have
options so for example a noun phrase can
be either a determiner followed by a
noun or it can recursively KO itself and
turn into a noun phrase followed by a
prepositional phrase so it is this kind
of alternative rules that would bring us
to our multiple parses for given
sentence so one thing that I want to
point is that the phrases the things
that have appeared as the last symbol
and P P P and VP are all considered to
be headed constituents what that means
is that one of their components is more
important than the others and this is
not surprisingly the noun for the noun
phrase the preposition for the
prepositional phrase and the verb for
the verb phrase so heads of constituents
is a very important concept that will
come up again in the later slides so
let's look now at some more examples and
understand why phrase structure grammar
is are important in parsing the first
thing that we need to realize that
sentences are not just bags of words so
for example the sentence Alice bought
Bob flowers is distinct from the
sentence Bob both Alice flowers so
clearly a parser would help us
understand that in the first sentence
Alice is the subject or the doer of the
action or is in the second sentence
Alice is the recipient of the action so
our phrase structure grammar is enforced
what is known as the context free if you
have language that's why the expression
phrase structure grammar and the
expression context-free grammar mean the
same thing so context review of language
tells us that a prepositional phrase
would look the same whether it is part
of the subject noun phrase or part of
any verb phrase it woke up at the same
internal structure so constituent order
is very important as I said earlier some
languages are subject verb object and
others are subject object verb and there
are some that have all the other four
combinations of subjects verbs and
objects so some commas can include
additional
transfer for example auxiliary verbs for
example the dog may have eaten my
homework some may and have here are
auxiliary verbs imperative sentences or
sentences that describe orders for
example leave the book on the table the
sentence doesn't have an explicit
subject interrogative sentences and in
question marks so for example did the
customer have a complaint so there are
two types of interrogative questions
they're yes/no questions like this one
here and there WH questions for example
where when and so on they can also be
negative sentences where the main verb
is negated so the customer didn't have a
complaint in this case did not didn't is
the expression of negation so let's now
look at the longer example that
incorporates some of those types of
sentences so we have now a few new rules
on the first line we have sentence that
was used to be just a noun phrase verb
phrase now we have two additional
options so can you figure out what
changes were made to the grammar to make
it more powerful than the previous
example well the answer will be on the
next slide so let's look at some of the
changes so one of them is on the first
line we have now a new rule that turns a
sentence into auxiliary noun phrase verb
phrase so for example something like
have the children arrived home and we
also have a new concept of a nominal
which can be either a noun or it can be
a nominal followed by a noun so this way
we can create sequences of nouns where
the first one modifies the second one
and so on and we have now moved the
prepositional phrase from under noun
phrase to under nominal so it's a very
different structure syntactically what's
also new is that the verb phrase rules
include a role for just a VP turning
into V so this is an example where we
have no direct object and no
prepositional phrases so that would be
what is known as an intransitive verb so
here's an example of the penn treebank
the penn treebank
is a very large resource for our parsing
information that was manually built at
the University of Pennsylvania in the 90
it has been extensively used for
training parsers over the last 20 years
I will revisit it later on but for now I
just want to give an example of a
realistic sentence that was included
from The Wall Street Journal as you can
see there are two sentences here the
first sentence is marked on the top with
s and the second one is at the bottom
half of the page also marked with an S
the first sentence has a noun phrase
subject and a verb phrase and the second
one does too and then you can look at
the rest of their information on the
slide you can see that the first
sentence has some additional
constituents such as adjectives of
phrases or HP in this case 61 years old
the second sentence has a modal verb or
an auxiliary verb like will and so on so
this is just to give you an example of a
realistic sentence that is very much
unlike the toy examples that we looked
at so far let's now discuss the idea of
a leftmost derivation if you are given a
grammar in a sentence there is a one way
and there is a unique way in which one
can parse the sentence by always
expanding the leftmost unexpanded
non-terminal so let's look at this
example
so the leftmost derivation is a sequence
of strings s 1 s 2 all the way to s n
where s 1 is the start symbol for
sadnesses that will be s and s n the
last thing in this list only includes
terminal symbols or words so here's an
example we start with s and then we
replace the s with NP VP by applying the
row s goes to NP VP then we replace the
NP which is the leftmost unexpanded
symbol so far with determiner noun verb
phrase and so on and so forth until we
finally get the child ate the cake with
a fork where everything in S is terminal
symbols so let's look at this
graphically we have an S at the
beginning we want to expand it into a
sentence so we s is the last more symbol
s goes to n P VP now the leftmost symbol
is NP
we expand NP determiner now the leftmost
unknown expanded symbol is determiner we
replace it with a word that's a terminal
so we can stop here now the leftmost
unexpanded symbol is n we replace that
with child
it's again a terminal symbol or a word
so we can move on to VP the VP now gets
expanded to VP NP because this is the
first wor with VP as the left-hand side
now the second VP that was just created
needs to be expanded so that gives us
the verb 8 we have one less thing to
expand that's noun phrase and P so the
first wolf or noun phrase in the grammar
is noun phrase prepositional phrase we
now expand the newly generated noun
phrase to get determiner noun and then
we expanded the turbine and the noun
into words and we have now the
prepositional phrase to expand the roof
of prepositional phrases that it's
something that starts with a preposition
and is followed by a noun phrase the
preposition becomes the word with and
the noun phrase is a determiner followed
by a noun and then finally we have the
determiner turn into the and the noun
turning to fork so this gives us the
leftmost derivation given that grammar
and given the sentence the child ate the
cake with a fork now you should realize
that this is not necessarily the correct
semantic interpretation of the sentence
this is just the one that comes up first
when we follow the leftmost derivation
principle